philosophers have invented many
different theories of truth over the
years
the three most prominent ones that i'm
aware of are something called the
coherence theory of truth that's where a
statement is true
if it doesn't conflict with other things
that we know are true
so it's coherent with everything else
that we know
that's the coherence theory of truth the
pragmatic theory of truth is that a
thing is true
if it works so something works as an
explanation
or as a fact about something then we say
it's true
the third one is called the
correspondence theory of truth this
is where a thing is true insofar as it
corresponds to
some aspect of reality popper was
persuaded of
this correspondence theory of truth and
he writes about it in
objective knowledge in an essay called
two faces of common sense and i'm going
to read just a part of it here because
he
expands upon this notion
of the correspondence theory of truth by
introducing
a new term a neologism and papa wrote
and just as the notion of truth has been
regarded as
suspect by many philosophers not
entirely without some grain of truth or
reason
as became clear from tarski's analysis
of the semantic paradoxes
so has the notion of a better approach
or approximation to the truth
or of nearness to the truth or as i have
called it
of a greater verisimilitude
in order to allay these suspicions i
have introduced a logical notion
of verisimilitude by combining two
notions
both originally introduced by tarski a
the notion of truth and b the notion of
the logical content of a statement
and so he goes on he's referring there
to alfred tarski his friend and another
philosopher who
convinced him of this idea of the
correspondence theory of truth now this
idea of
nearness to truth or closeness to truth
is kind of reminiscent of
chapter two of the beginning of infinity
which is titled
closer to reality not closer to truth
but closer to reality
so it was interesting to me that there's
this kind of similarity why did david
choose
closer to reality and not closer to
truth
is it a big deal is there anything
lurking there that would be interesting
well i'm about to ask him a question
about this and if you want more
you can go to the oxford karl popper
society
where on youtube david has given a talk
precisely about this whole concept of
truth it's a very interesting analysis
different to what i've heard anywhere
else anyone talking about truth
he doesn't deny the existence of truth
he's not a relativist
but he explains why we can't utter
truth truth as he will explain applies
to propositions for example
the content of mathematics or the
content of logic there
we use variables in order to represent
propositions but we can't
utter we cannot speak propositions we
can speak statements which as david says
are
at best approximations to propositions
mathematics logic they deal in these
abstract propositions
and we use you know letters like p and q
and we say if p is true and q is true
then the conjunction of the two p and q
must be true
but even those letters p and q aren't
exactly propositions themselves they
represent propositions
in much the same way as the numeral for
two represents the number two
but we can't write down the number two
we can only rep
we can only write down things that
represent that number
so mathematics and logic for example
are not about proving things true
they're about proving things
it's quite different we assume that if
for example
if the axioms that we begin with are
true
then what happens at the end of our
proof
would produce something that's true but
we can't prove that the axioms to begin
with
are true in the first place and indeed
every other area of our knowledge is
kind of like this science and history
morality and philosophy
they're all claims about this underlying
reality
but we can't say ultimately true
statements about
any part of that reality the best that
we can do is to make guesses we can
conjecture
facts and explanations about that
reality and by
refuting some of those guesses some of
those claims we end up over time
describing and explaining that reality
with ever greater fidelity
as we refute the things that we have
discovered
can't be true and in this way either
a thing we say about reality is correct
or it's refuted there's no probably
about it there's no
gray area gray zone here i think it's
either
the best explanation that we've got
right now or it's been refuted
and in either case that simply is the
case it's not
fifty percent refuted or fifty percent
accepted and in the answer today that
david's about to give me
he's going to say something about
probability as well
and he says that probability is
basically a scam and for more on that
see this wonderful talk that he give i
think it's
very under appreciated out of all the
talks and david's given so many talks
over the years
this is absolutely one of my favorites
it's just
his voice and some slides but that's
more than enough it really is a tour de
force of philosophy really getting at
the heart
of certain epistemological facts and
explanations about
why the importation of probability into
a vast array of fields
is simply misconceived not least because
in so many fields economics say or the
financial system
not to mention science of course
guessing the future
means guessing the content of knowledge
yet to be created
an impossibility david goes through a
whole bunch of fields he puts them up
there on the screen and then
proceeds to cross them out one at a time
after he's given an explanation about
why probability doesn't apply in that
area
so you cannot assign probabilities to
almost anything
except some very very narrow things
people have asked me over the years
where can we assign probabilities well
only in those places where we know
human knowledge cannot possibly have an
effect on the outcome
a game of chance is a reasonably good
demonstration of this you can know
everything there is to know about
roulette
that won't help you beat the casino
indeed it tells you that in the long run
you will lose or you will probably lose
which is circular of course
but whatever the case your creativity
won't affect the likelihood of the ball
coming up number 14
or on red and so on the odds are
in other words fixed and they're fixed
in favor of the casino but in the rest
of human life
almost the odds are not fixed we take
action to
change the odds what's the chance of
having a car accident
well you could probably look up
statistics sure but you personally
might be a much worse driver you
personally might have terrible
misconceptions about driving that other
people don't have
the chance of a car accident in your
area on a tuesday afternoon might be
one in ten thousand but that might not
apply to you
you may drive in a more hazardous way it
might also be the case that the
authorities have recently used their
creativity to change parts of the road
for example speed limits which just
changed the probability in a way that
you couldn't predict and that the
statistics could not have taken into
account prior to
the change in the speed limit so much
the worse for long-term
scientific predictions our favorite
example
is the probability that the sun will
expand into a red giant within the next
10 billion years
ask a typical astronomer and they'll
tell you that it's almost certain
given what we know about stars like the
sun of course this assumes that no one
in the next 1 billion years will be able
to do anything about what happens to the
sun
in 10 billion years that example really
is a
parable more than anything else for our
more
pressing concerns like the prediction
that there is a 50
chance that the greenland ice sheet will
completely melt within the next thousand
years
based on people not doing anything about
it
probability tends to lead to spurious
predictions
which we call prophecies guesses about
the future that assume human creativity
can have no impact on the outcome i've
always liked to this
prediction prophecy distinction because
it sharpens
up a couple of words that otherwise mean
similar things
neither is a neologism an invented word
so i asked david about all of this
as well as this concept that poppa had
of verisimilitude because after all
it is a neologism okay so you mentioned
that that piece of
sort of prosaic terminology explanation
that that
we all use but i think that you've uh
put a spin on it that is
is is quite helpful but turning to
another word
a word that you in fact don't use and it
brings me to chapter two
and that's called don't worry i'm not
going to go through every single chapter
chronologically but
then just a few of them but chapter two
is titled closer to reality
but karl popper had this term
verisilimitude
which means something like closer to
truth and it seems to me you've
deliberately avoided that word but why
is it because it
contains a misconception it's misleading
or it's a needless neologism
what would be the reason to avoid such a
word i think all of those things and i
think even
even pop i don't know the history of
this very well but i think even popper
went off it
popper in general was very into
logic uh this is i think partly
a sign of the times that that uh
the people who were uh doing the
prevailing
philosophy of science at the time and
positivism and logical positivism
many of them were logicians and
mathematical logicians
even poppa wanted a papa originally
uh didn't want to even to mention truth
at all
and then he got converted by it by
tarsky and he tells a story uh
about how they were sitting on a park
bench in vienna and taski explained the
correspondence theory of truth to him
and he realized that this is this is uh
in fact a useful concept after all
but i wonder what logic of scientific
discovery would have looked like
if he had in fact written the whole of
it without ever mentioning truth
uh i think it would have been worse in
some ways in that it's
uh it's difficult to make the case for
realism
if you don't have a concept of truth and
papa was very keen to
formulate a realistic philosophy of
science
but on the other hand when you do
introduce truth and especially very
similitude
then the idea is that somehow we can
utter
truth or at least we can utter something
that's 90
percent true or something like that and
we'd have it there by a method of
measuring that 90 percent
i think very similar to it was was not
intended to be something you could
measure
right but uh if if you can't measure it
then it's only use is a sort of
philosophical
regulating principle and uh i think
knowledge and problems are much better
concepts probably poppa's fundamental
concept the word the way it turned out
when when
after all these experiments with
different uh conceptual frameworks or
whatever
were is the idea of a problem because
that comes up not only in his philosophy
of science but
in his political philosophy as well and
uh more generally uh he
he he generalizes it to um
even the problem situation of a gene
i'm not sure even i would go that far
but uh
it it's it's a very unifying concept and
on the other hand i don't think very
similitude is useful at all
and as i said even truth
one has to be very careful to to
use the concept of truth only as a
property of abstractions
and never as uh something you can
actually
measure or or no um
have have a direct access to
so therefore would you avoid even saying
that
scientific explanations or indeed
explanations in any domain that we
happen to be interested in
would even be approximately true because
that would also
entail some kind of quantitative claim
about how
close we are or can we still use that
word can we still say it's approximately
true or it's a
it's uh there's some degree of accuracy
in this
claim about that i think we we can use
it because
again depending on on the problem
situation if one is speaking informally
then one can use imprecise terminology
i just caught myself just a moment ago
saying probably
you know i'm generally opposed to the
whole concept of probability i think
it's a scam
yes um but but that doesn't mean that in
in
everyday life uh we don't know what we
mean when we're saying
some papa was pro probably meant so and
so
i don't mean that there was a stochastic
process where he
where he he could have meant something
else with with the probability 0.15
yeah i often find myself uh catching
myself precisely the same way that you
said
uh generally it kind of has left my
vocabulary
in just in day-to-day life using the
word probably but i
at the same time i don't um you know
chastise myself too much because
in order to communicate normally you
know people are going to use this word
they understand
i think um yes
there is no such thing as a perfectly
precise language
yes so we we want to use uh terms and
and ways of understanding things that
are suitable to the problem
so there we go in any area of life there
will be reasons to use
sharp language at times which is to say
highly precise terminology
medical doctors and pilots might want to
be extremely precise in exactly what
they mean when they are communicating
with people
in their area of work sometimes in
broader areas of science we want precise
words
and even in philosophy but at other
times because of what david has said
there
there can be no perfectly precise
language no perfectly
unambiguous language we're going to need
to use words that will contain
perhaps some scope for misconception
indeed this is
always the case as popper said one of
our favorite quips of his
it is impossible to speak in such a way
as to not be misunderstood
in other words you could always be
misunderstood someone else can make a
mistake about what you intended
and that's always the case because we
are after all all of us
fallible
you